Title: All There Is with Anderson Cooper
URL: https://www.cnn.com/audio/podcasts/all-there-is-with-anderson-cooper
Published Date: None
Content:
Whoopi Goldberg: Why Did Y’all Leave Me? All There Is with Anderson Cooper Whoopi Goldberg sits down with Anderson for a candid and moving conversation about the life and deaths of her mother Emma Johnson and her brother Clyde. Visit the All There Is online grief community at cnn.com/allthereisonline Help is available if you or someone you know is struggling with suicidal thoughts or mental health matters. In the US: Call or text 988, the Suicide & Crisis Lifeline. Globally: The International Association for Suicide Prevention and Befrienders Worldwide have contact information for crisis centers around the world. Oct 16, 2024 37 mins

Andrew Garfield’s Grief All There Is with Anderson Cooper Andrew Garfield's mother Lynne died from pancreatic cancer in 2019. In this deeply moving and emotional episode Andrew talks with Anderson about how grief is now the only way for him to feel close to his mom again. “The wound is the only route to the gift,” Andrew says. “The grief and the loss are the only route to the vitality of being alive.” Visit the All There Is online grief community at cnn.com/allthereisonline Watch this conversation on YouTube at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9ruMKk26pW8 Oct 8, 2024 44 mins

Season 3: All There Is All There Is with Anderson Cooper Grief never goes away but we can learn to live with it and learn from it. In Season 3 of All There Is, Anderson Cooper continues his deeply personal journey to understand his own feelings of grief in all its complexities, and in moving and honest discussions, learn from others who’ve experienced life-altering losses. All There Is with Anderson Cooper is about the people we lose, the people left behind, and how we can live on – with loss and with love. Trailer 1 min

Sharing Our Grief All There Is with Anderson Cooper This episode, the season finale, is a reminder that none of us is alone in our grief. Anderson shares some of the thousands of extraordinarily moving voicemail messages he’s received from listeners. Feb 7, 2024 35 mins

A Son’s Struggle, A Father’s Grief All There Is with Anderson Cooper Charlie Shelin was an exceptionally bright child who worked hard for years to keep the dark thoughts in his head from consuming him. In this moving conversation, his dad, Randy, talks with Anderson about Charlie’s mental health struggles and the layers of grief their family has lived with for years. Jan 31, 2024 32 mins

Mama Shu: Turning Loss Into Love All There Is with Anderson Cooper Shamayim Harris, known in Detroit as Mama Shu, knows all too well the pain of loss. In 2007 her 2-year-old son Jakobi Ra was killed in a hit and run accident, and in 2021 her other son Chinyelu was murdered. Mama Shu talks with Anderson about how she worked hard to, in her words, “turn my grief into glory and my loss into love.” Focusing on one block in her neighborhood, she began cleaning up blighted properties and has created the non-profit Avalon Village, which aims to be a safe and welcoming space for kids in her community. “This is grief,” she tells Anderson, “it just looks beautiful.” Jan 24, 2024 28 mins

Nicole Chung: Carrying Memories Alone All There Is with Anderson Cooper When best-selling author Nicole Chung’s adoptive parents died, she felt all alone. Her family had unraveled, and there was no one else who remembered what she was like as a little girl. Nicole speaks with Anderson about carrying her parents’ memories alone and the search for her birth parents, which led to a series of surprising discoveries. You can call and leave a message at: (917) 727-6818. We'd especially like to hear if there's something that you've learned in your grief that might help others. Jan 17, 2024 37 mins

Ashley Judd: Grief, Love and Naomi All There Is with Anderson Cooper When Naomi Judd died by suicide in 2022, after a long struggle with mental illness, her daughter Ashley found her. In this deeply moving, revealing, and insightful conversation Ashley Judd talks about the trauma she has worked hard to face, the grief she now feels, and how her mother’s spirit is still very much alive in her life. Jan 10, 2024 41 mins

Revisiting Stephen Colbert: Grateful for Grief All There Is with Anderson Cooper The podcast is taking a short break, new episodes of All There Is will return January 10th. In the meantime, we are sharing Anderson's powerful conversation with Stephen Colbert from the first season of the podcast. Can we learn to love the things we most wish had never happened? Can we really become grateful for grief? Heartbreak? The deaths of loved ones? Stephen believes we can and explains why and how. It is a deeply moving, thought-provoking, and at times funny conversation that Anderson says has had a major impact on his life. Dec 27, 2023 52 mins

Love, Loss and Parenting All There Is with Anderson Cooper Amanda Petrusich, a talented writer for The New Yorker who often covers music, lost her husband, Bret Stetka, suddenly in 2022. Their daughter, Nico, was just 13 months old. Amanda talks with Anderson about grieving an unexpected loss, while navigating life as a single parent. They also explore the constantly changing nature of grief, the role music has played for Amanda and how she talks about Bret with her daughter. Dec 20, 2023 36 mins
