Title: How the world’s largest tech event is forging a future AI economy
URL: https://www.cnn.com/sponsor/edition/gitex-global/worlds-largest-tech-event-future-ai-economy/index.html
Published Date: 2024-10-15 09:08:19.841000+00:00
Content:
As 200,000 tech stakeholders descend on the Dubai World Trade Centre, GITEX GLOBAL 2024 promises to be a gathering that shapes the future of technology and innovation worldwide.

A new era

Since its inception over four decades ago, GITEX GLOBAL has showcased pioneering technologies ranging from IBM’s microcomputers in the 1980s and early versions of the Mac, to 5G and cutting-edge startups.

Over time the conference has evolved from a regional tech exhibition to the largest tech and startup event worldwide – attracting industrial leaders, decision-makes, academia and researches from across the globe.

TCB Team & Martin Pfeiffer

This year’s GITEX GLOBAL marks a new chapter in this impressive story, with an international participation increase of almost 40% from last year. From October 14–18, the Dubai World Trade Centre will welcome over 6,500 leading tech companies, 1,800 startups and more than 200,000 visitors from 180 countries, making it the most diverse edition in its history.

The five-day event is also fully integrated with Expand North Star, the world’s largest startup and investment show, which runs concurrently at Dubai Harbour from October 13-16.

A next generation agenda

GITEX GLOBAL will span 40 halls across two locations, bringing together the entire international technology community to set the global agenda for the future AI economy.

Artificial Intelligence will be at the forefront of this year’s GITEX GLOBAL, under the theme “Global Collaboration to Forge a Future AI Economy”, with five key themes across the five days and ten halls dedicated to breakthrough innovations in IoT, data, and cloud computing. With the global AI market projected to reach $2.7 trillion by 2032, the event will showcase the latest advancements driving this remarkable growth.

GITEX GLOBAL 2024 AGENDA MONDAY: TECH INVESTMENT DAY - Explore the latest investment trends that are reshaping global wealth.

Explore the latest investment trends that are reshaping global wealth. TUESDAY: SUPER AI TUESDAY - Learn how AI is transforming business strategies

- Learn how AI is transforming business strategies WEDNESDAY: CYBERSECURITY DAY - Explore innovative cybersecurity strategies to tackle emerging threats

- Explore innovative cybersecurity strategies to tackle emerging threats THURSDAY: DATA CENTRES UNIVERSE - Discover the future of data management and infrastructure

Discover the future of data management and infrastructure FRIDAY: FUTURISTIC FRIDAY - Where groundbreaking technologies redefine the boundaries of possibility

Tech giants such as Adobe, Alibaba, Google, Huawei, IBM, Microsoft, Nvidia and Oracle will all present their latest AI products, while GITEX GLOBAL is also planning the region’s largest Data Centre Symposium, addressing an unprecedented demand for data storage. In addition, the World Future Economy Digital Leaders Summit will see global innovators and influential leaders address critical priorities shaping the future of technology.

In total, the conference will feature over 120 hours of deep tech-focused content, facilitating discussions on the implications of AI in sectors like healthcare, finance, and education.

Opportunities for startups to shine

One of the biggest changes to the lineup this year is the debut of GITEX Editions. In alignment with Dubai’s D33 Economic Agenda – which aims to establish the city as the home of 30 unicorns by 2030 – this new platform serves as a strategic base for high-growth companies, investors, and governance bodies to accelerate the scale and impact of startups worldwide.

Over 65 unicorns with a combined valuation of $400 billion will participate, offering unparalleled opportunities for founders, investors, and industry experts to connect and accelerate innovation.

TCB Team & Martin Pfeiffer

Speakers will include Fabrizio del Maffeo, Co-Founder and CEO of Axelera AI, a company valued at $500 million which is aiming to become the “European NVIDIA.” Also featured is Dr. Alexander Zhavoronkov, Founder and CEO of InSilico Medicine in Hong Kong, a biotech company valued at $1.5 billion focused on AI-driven drug discovery and synthetic biology.

Other attending startups represent the forefront of innovation, across sectors such as synthetic biotech, sustainability biotech, quantum deeptech, and semiconductor supercomputing.

Combating the cybercrime conundrum

Cybersecurity remains a top concern for business leaders globally. With estimated cybercrime damages nearing $10.5 trillion annually by 2025, GITEX GLOBAL will provide critical insights into innovative cybersecurity strategies.

The GITEX Cyber Valley, hosted by the UAE Cybersecurity Council, will feature a packed conference agenda, live hacks on stage, workshops, and an impactful gathering for CISOs, CIOs, and GRC leaders.

TCB Team & Martin Pfeiffer

Attendees will also hear from industry leaders like Dr. Diane Janosek, a cybersecurity leader with roles at the National Security Agency, the White House, and the Pentagon, and Brett Johnson, a former cybercriminal turned expert on cybercrime and identity theft. The event will also feature insights from Ekaterina Serban, Vice President of Privacy and Information Security at Bosch, and Surinder Lall, Global Information Security Lead at Paramount.

As the world navigates the complexities of rapid technological advancement, GITEX GLOBAL 2024 stands as a beacon for collaboration, innovation, and international public-private partnerships.

By bringing together diverse stakeholders from across the globe, the event is poised to shape the future of the AI economy and reinforce Dubai’s vision of becoming a global tech hub.

Book your ticket to GITEX GLOBAL 2024 here.
